There once was a man who had a donkey that had carried the grain sacks to the mill tirelessly for many long years. But his strength was failing and he was growing more and more unfit for work. So his master began to consider getting rid of him. But the donkey, who became aware that his master had something evil in mind, ran away and set out on the road to Bremen. There he thought he could surely become a town musician.

After he had walked for a while, he found a hunting hound lying on the road, howling pitifully. "Why are you howling so, old fellow," asked the donkey.

"Ah," replied the hound, "because I am old and grow weaker each day, and can no longer hunt, my master wanted to shoot me dead. So I fled. But how am I supposed to earn my bread now?"

"You know what," said the donkey, "I am going to Bremen and shall become town musician there. Come with me and engage yourself as a musician as well. I will play the lute and you shall beat the kettledrum."

The hound agreed, and they went on together. It wasn't long before they saw a cat sitting on the path, with a face like three rainy days. "Now then, old whiskers, what has gone wrong for you," asked the donkey.

"Who can be merry when his neck is at risk," answered the cat. "Because I am old now, my teeth are dull, and I prefer to sit by the fire and spin rather than chase after mice, my mistress wanted to drown me. However, I did manage to sneak away. But it's hard to know what to do. Where am I to go now?"

"Go with us to Bremen. You know something about night music. You can become a town musician there."

The cat thought that was a good idea and went with them. As the three went on together, they passed by a farm, where the rooster was sitting on the gate crowing with all his might.

"Your crowing pierces right through to the marrow," said the donkey. "What's on your mind?"

"The lady of the house has ordered the cook to chop off my head this evening. Tomorrow, on Sunday, company is coming and they want to eat me in the soup. Now I am crowing at the top of my lungs while still I can."

"Oh come on!" said the donkey. "Why don't you come away with us. We are going to Bremen. You can find something better than death everywhere. You have a good voice, and when we make music together it will sound magnificant." The rooster liked the suggestion and the four went on together.

They could not reach the town of Bremen in one day, however, and that evening they came to a forest where they wanted to spend the night. The donkey and the hound laid themselves down under a large tree, the cat climbed onto a branch, and the rooster flew up to the top of the tree, where it was safest for him.

Source: http://german.about.com/library/bllesen07E.htm